A. SAM for medical image segmentation

Traditional deep learning methods [2], [14], [15] are mostly designed for specific tasks and often face challenges in transferring to other domains. SAM [6] is the pioneering large foundation model for segmentation, consists of three primary

components: an image encoder, a prompt encoder, and a mask decoder. 

**The image encoder** is based on a standard Vision Transformer (ViT) that has been pretrained using Masked Autoencoders (MAE).

**The prompt encoder** can operate in either a sparse (e.g.,boxes) or dense (e.g., masks) manner.

**The mask decoder** is a Transformer decoder block adapted to include a dynamic mask prediction head. This decoder employs two-way cross-attention mechanisms to capture the interactions between the prompt and image embeddings.

Subsequently, SAM upsamples the image embedding, and a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) maps the resulting token to a dynamic linear classifier that predicts the ground truth (GT) for the given image I.

Due to its strong zero-shot performance, SAM marks a major breakthrough in the field of image segmentation. To improve the unsatisfactory performance of SAM on medical image segmentation tasks, some approaches are to fine-tune SAM on medical images, including full fine-tuning and parameter-efficient fine-tuning [16]–[19]. Recently, MedSAM [7] has investigated SAM’s application to medical image segmentation, exploring its performance in various contexts such as endoscopic surgery [20], tumor segmentation [21], polyp segmentation [22]. However, the existing MedSAMbased methods rarely investigate the sensitivity of different prompts.

B. Prompts-based methods for medical image segmentation

Prompts-based methods have gained traction in medical image segmentation due to their ability to provide flexible and adaptive guidance during interactive segmentation tasks. While effective in some cases, current adaptations of SAM rely heavily on high-quality, standard prompts (such as points, boxes, and masks) to deliver satisfactory performance in medical image segmentation tasks. Wu et al. [23] introduce Space-Depth Transpose for adapting 2D SAM to 3D medical images and Hyper-Prompting Adapter for prompt-conditioned adaptation. Deng et al. [24] propose a multi-box prompt triggered uncertainty estimation for SAM that uses Monte Carlo methods and test-time augmentation to enhance performance and provide pixel-level reliability for segmented lesions or tissues. Li et al. [25] propose a 3D medical image segmentation model using a single point prompt with SAM’s pretrained vision transformer and lightweight adapters, featuring a hybrid network and boundary-aware loss for precise results. Wu et al. [26] presents One-Prompt Segmentation method that combines one-shot and interactive approaches to handle unseen tasks with a single prompt in one pass. Currently, most MedSAM-based methods are limited to using a single type of prompt rather than multiple types of prompts [24], [25], [27], [28]. This reduces the available information for the model and may result in insufficient segmentation performance.

C. Uncertainty-based methods for medical image segmentation

Uncertainty estimation [29] in segmentation has become increasingly important, as it offers a way to assess the confidence in model predictions. This is crucial in high stakes applications such as medical image analysis, where mistakes can lead to serious repercussions. There are two primary types of uncertainty—aleatoric, which originates from the inherent noise in the data [30], and epistemic, which is due to the model’s limitations—is the key to enhancing the reliability of deep neural networks [31]. For instance, Saad et al. [32] utilized shape and appearance priors to quantify uncertainty in probabilistic medical image segmentation. Parisot et al. [33] leveraged segmentation uncertainty to inform adaptive sampling strategies for the simultaneous segmentation and registration of brain tumors. Additionally, Prassni et al. [34] developed a method to visualize uncertainty in random walker based segmentation, which was then applied to volumetric segmentation of brain MRI and abdominal CT images. Zou et al. [35]. proposed a trusted brain tumor segmentation network that generates robust segmentation results and reliable uncertainty estimations by leveraging subjective logic theory to model uncertainty and parameterize class probabilities as a Dirichlet distribution. Additionally, uncertainty estimation in large models, such as SAM, is critical for improving the reliability of segmentation outputs [24]. Yao et al. [27] propose a test-phase prompt augmentation technique for SAM that integrates multi-box augmentation with an aleatoric uncertainty-based FN and FP correction strategy to improve medical image segmentation. Zhang et al. [28] propose UR-SAM, an uncertainty-rectified framework that enhances SAM’s reliability in medical image segmentation by combining prompt augmentation with uncertainty-based rectification. Despite these advancements, research on integrating uncertainty estimation with prompt based MedSAM remains insufficient, particularly in how to utilize uncertainty to guide reliable prompts.

